An arc flash is a rapid release of electric discharge that has managed to travel outside of its intended circuit. These arc flashes can and do cause serious electrocution injuries to any person careless enough to be nearby. And that’s why, to minimize arc flash injuries, arc flashes are often given thorough safety investigations by building design firms; everything from prevention, to warning, to intensity is considered.

Arc flashes can be so dangerous because they are unpredictable and therefore difficult to prevent. Any number of things can set off an arc flash: dust getting into equipment, tools being dropped onto equipment, materials corroding, faulty installation, etc. Preventing arc flashes through locating a cause is then usually not be feasible; it would require multiple safety checks be performed on every piece of equipment whenever the equipment is operated. Breakers, which stop large currents, are also not useful for preventing flashes; the breaker’s relays are often set for currents too high to recognize a flash as a fault.

Since it’s so difficult to prevent, the institute of electrical and electronics engineers (IEEE) and the national fire protection agency (NFPA) have created arc flash standards. These standards focus on warning, protecting, and teaching people that will work near equipment that can flash. In terms of warning, the standards state that any firm designing a building must place clear warning labels near the equipment. In terms of protecting, the standards state that proper protective equipment must be available to whoever will be handling the equipment and that the circuit must have a way to be de-energized. In terms of teaching, the standards state that anyone that will handle the equipment must be given instructions on how to identify live parts of a circuit, nominal voltages of live parts, and clearances specified by design firm.

Finally as a last means of keeping people safe, arc flashes energy levels are calculated. These are calculated so that it can be known what energy levels a person caught in a flash has been exposed to. The energy levels can be calculated by using equations given by either IEEE or NFPA. Needed for the calculation are the expected minimum and maximum flash current as well as the expected minimum and maximum voltage.

Arc flash investigations are an important part of keeping people safe from being electrocuted by high voltage equipment. That's why the IEEE and NFPA standards were created. They keep people safe by ensuring that any equipment that can flash will have a clear label outlining things like voltage and energy levels and that proper protective equipment is always nearby.
